On April 2, 2014, two dutch girls, 21 year old Kris Kremers and 22 year old Lisanne Froon, were discovered missing at Boquete, Panama.
Their disappearance resulted in the biggest search operation ever undertaken in Panama.
Teams, helicopters, and dogs searched 1000 kilometers of trails in a wide area around Boquete.
They searched for two full weeks, and they found absolutely NOTHING. Not a single trace of the two missing girls.
After two weeks, the search teams ran out of options. "If the girls were anywhere in this area, we would have found them!"
But if the two girls did not suffer some kind of accident, or became lost in the forest, as was originally presumed, what could have happened to them?
In total shock, Marcus tells his story to the park ranger at the start of the trail, however when SINAFRONT, the border police arrives they find nothing suspicious.
The next morning, a team from SINAPROC once again searches the place and its surroundings, finding only one plastic water bottle, which turns out to belong to Marcus.
The story of what Marcus may, or may not, have heard is never resolved.
Around the same time, SINAPROC is also searching for one of their own members, Osman Valenzuela, who participated in a search for the two missing dutch girls on April 4. Around noon the next day, Osman's body is found in a river under a bridge. Some say he drowned, others say he was murdered.
Years later, an image which is supposed to have been found on the phone of Osman Valenzuela, turns up on Internet forums, and all to soon the rumor goes around that the picture shows Kris and Lisanne, swimming with Osman and one other person.
Although the whole story of the swimming photo is successfully debunked by Christian Hardinghaus and Annette Nenner in their book 'Still Lost in Panama' these old rumors die hard and even today the photo is still frequently associated with Kris and Lisanne.
Meanwhile, as the days drag by without any news, the hundreds of men and women who search the mountains around Boquete start to loose hope. There is no place left they have not searched, if Kris and Lisanne are anywhere in this area, they should have found them long ago!
For a short moment, some hope returns when on April 10 a small white bag and, right next to it, a pink insole are found in a remote area of the mountains between the Pedra de Lino trail and the Pianista trail on the Pacific side of the continental divide, a place where few tourists will ever go.
The video of the discovery is placed online the next day, however due to incorrect procedures the exact spot where the bag is found is never established and any fingerprints or biological traces contained inside are instantly contaminated.
Well, here you can find
This bag.
with a few bites
some cookies, juice
a cardboard box
Papaya with pineapple.
This way.
There are quite a few packages.
bread
and one
a sole of
It doesn't look like shoes.
I don't know if it's slippers.
Here you can find it.
as you can see
Here is a clean one.
And there it is.
Right now I'm finding myself
like 2 or 3 km from the pandura
This is all I can find.
until now
but
right here.
Here it would seem
a hair
But this hair is not distinguished
If it will be
It's a long hair.
So I'm going to save this for
to see
I'm going to keep looking.
For a few days the search, which was on the verge of being downgraded, is revived as the are between the two trails is extensively searched, however no further trails are found.
On April 24, the contents of the bag are examined by the forensic laboratory, but although some DNA traces are found there is no match with either Kris or Lisanne, and there is no sign the bag is in any way connected to the case of the missing dutch girls.
Without any further progress in the search and with all options exhausted, SINAPROC downgrades the operation to a monitoring phase. Basically, they have given up.
Although he was not involved in the official search operation, Feliciano assisted with many other locals as a volunteer, and he is certain that if the girls were anywhere in the area, something should have been found already.
With the searches, would they have been found already?
With the searches they would have been found.
It didn't take me more than a week because of all the problems that would have happened.
That the girls would have been injured by animals, by things,
One would have seen the presence of gallots, of things, and would have found oneself.
I mean, part of his belonging or whatever it would have been, but it would have been found.
I mean, for me, there's got to be something,
There has to be people's involvement in something that's not good.
And even Arturo Alvarado, the head of the local SINAPROC division, who lead the search, declares that something else must have happened.
Another of the situations we could be facing and that cannot be ruled out.
is that they could have been assaulted and moved to another place
and then other actions occur that so far prevent its real location.
But it is a lot easier to state it must have been a crime as the search operation did not manage to find anything, then to find actual evidence of such a crime! And with the ball now on their side of the field, the police remains at a total loss.
Due to the original optimism that the two girls were lost on the mountain and would be found soon enough, the police is also desperately late and running behind the events.
There are rumors that Kris and Lisanne were visible on several CCTV camera's, but the tape of these camera's appears to have been overwritten by the time the police finally requests the footage.
Although an initial inspection was carried out earlier, a full forensic search of the bedroom of the two girls is only carried on on April 8, one week after their appearance, and by that time so many people have been walking in and out of this room and so many items have been touched or moved that little can be learned from this.
Perhaps even more surprising, the hard disks of the computers at the language school, which contain the all important browser history of the searches, are only removed for inspection on April 10 and by that time so many other people have been working on these PC's that no conclusive data is ever gained from this inspection.
Logging's of mobile phone connections from the various cell phone towers in the area, which could be vital in tracking down the movements of the two girls, are only requested on April 8, one week after the disappearance, and once again no useful data is ever obtained from this.
After initial interviews on April 3, important further interviews are undertaken only on April 8, although sadly many important witnesses are never interviewed, and many of the questions asked are rather weird to say the least, and the same can be said about the answers!
For this video, it would take too long to go into details on all the peculiarities of these interviews, but on her YouTube site and blog, Scarlet has done a fantastic job in analyzing each affidavit, and we strongly encourage all of you to check these on her site. Links can be found in the description of this video.
All in all, international confidence that the Panamanian police is going to solve this case quickly is not high, and as the days pass by, former dutch police officer Erik Westra suspects Kris and Lisanne may have accidentally witnessed drugs trafficking on the Pianista trail, while others come up with other theories, many of which the Panamanian authorities would probably prefer to keep out of the spotlights.
Compared to other cities in Panama, crime rates in Boquete are moderate, however a quick search on Internet is sufficient to find a long list of allegations, and while the police is struggling to find any evidence, the assembled press has a field day in publishing the most gruesome scenario's. There is no doubt this is hurting all those who depend on tourism for their income.
Given this situation it is probably not surprising that on April 22 the Personería Municipal Boquete is relieved of the case and the chief public prosecutor's office of the third judicial district of Chiriquí, based in David, takes over, with Betzaida Pittí Cerrud investigating a crime involving the deprivation of liberty and kidnapping.
Years later, Pitti will claim that this was a political decision and that she was set up to fail, and she may well be correct in this, however there is also a lot of criticism on the way she handles this case, and in her first interview, the task she sets herself is rather surprising.
We will come back to this toward the end of this episode, however in general: if you start a police investigation on a crime, one would expect that the prime task is to arrest the perpetrator and solve the case, however there is not a word on this and all she mentions is finding the girls!
With the case still in limbo without the slightest trace of the two girls, the highly unusual decision is made on April 27 to fly a dutch police team out to Panama.
In an interview from April 28, Lisanne's brother Martijn is still showing the route to Casa Pedro as the most likely route taken, the same route which is also strongly promoted by Ingrid, the head of the language school. But in a later article, Betzaida Pitti will write she almost instantly dismissed this whole theory as the description the owner of Casa Pedro gave of the two girls does not match their actual appearances.
Around 15:30 they would have been seen by
Casa Pedro, but we quickly established that
this must have been other women as Pedro
described a long woman in a dark halflong shorts
and a smaller woman with shortly cropped
red-black hair.
Although we did not know what clothes the
girls were wearing that day, it was certain they
both had long hair and definitely not short
cropped hair."
[Betzaida Pitti, 'Lost in the Jungle' chapter 17]
"When I was put on the case we had a few
theories. To start with, we took into account that
the two might have been kidnapped from either
the language school or the home of their host
family with the purpose of taking them across
the border for sex traffic or organ trade, as there
were rumors that several hostels in Boquete had
ties with organized crime. Rumors which we were
never able to prove."
[Betzaida Pitti, 'Lost in the Jungle' chapter 17]
"Another possibility was that Kris and Lisanne
were kidnapped during their walk and transported
to an unknown location with a red truck, which
had been seen by several persons in the area."
[Betzaida Pitti, 'Lost in the Jungle' Chapter 17]
"It was also deemed possible that Kris and
Lisanne accidentally witnessed some criminal
activity and for that reason were kept prison
somewhere"
[Betzaida Pitti, 'Lost in the Jungle' Chapter 17]
"Finally, it was possible that Marcus, the
German tourist, had witnessed the abuse of
Kris and Lisanne, where the girls were
thrown into a ravine."
[Betzaida Pitti, 'Lost in the Jungle' Chapter 17]
"After the parents raised the tip money to
30.000 usd in May, we got a lot of new tips,
and based on this we searched on many
new places.
On May 20, we searched cabins in the Pianista
area, but found no evidence that could lead
to Kris and Lisanne."
{Betzaida Pitti, 'Lost in the Jungle', Chapter 17]
"On May 22, at 01.40 in the night, we raided
an Itialian restaurant (not il Pianista) after
an annonymous tip that the two women were
kidnapped from here, but once again we found
no evidence of this."
[Betzaida Pitti, 'Lost in the Jungle', Chapter 17]
Sadly, in a number of interviews we find a strong disconnect between statements from the family, as they appeared into the news in The Netherlands, and the later case description of Betzaida Pitti, which can be partly explained by the fact that for logical reasons the police was unwilling to reveal the information they had and were working on at that moment.
In their book 'Still Lost in Panama' the authors Christian Hardinghaus and Annette Ninner provide a very detailed report on the red truck story, which definitely contains sufficient connections to the case of Kris and Lisanne to be taken serious, and contrary to Martijn's statement there is every indication that the police did not easily dismiss these sightings.
The red pickup truck was seen by Oliva and several other witnesses driving down from the Pianista trail around 16:00 on April 1, with its trunk filled with branches, and then, once again, in a similar situation on April 3.
Police officers manage to establish the red truck is owned by a woman, who lives about 500 meters from the language school Spanish by the River. She states however that she did not drive the truck herself, and that on April 1 the truck was probably rented to the Feria de las Flores flower fair.
When interviewed by the police, the owner of the flower fair confirms this, stating that the red truck was rented on April 1 between 11:45 and 17:00 to collect mosses, bromelias, foilage, and ferns from two cabins on the upper part of the Pianista trail.
Although these times roughly coincide with the times that Kris and Lisanne walked up the mountain, the police does not find any further evidence linking the case of the missing girls with the red truck.
On May 16th there is a first hint as to why all previous searches up to that moment have found nothing, when the Panamanian civil defense organisation SINAPROC receives a tip that two bodies have been seen by one of the locals in a remote area of the Culebra river between the two cable bridges, far to the north of the present search area.
Due to the rainy season and the bad weather, this area is nearly impossible to reach though, and a helicopter which is send out to check fails to get close and low enough to get a good visual on the spot.
It takes two full days before SINAPROC searchers finally manage to get within sight of the area, but if there were any bodies than by that time they have probably been washed away by the river again, and nothing is found.
A few days later, there is another report that a helicopter noticed bodies floating in the Culebra river far down stream of the previous area, but once again by the time search teams arrive, nothing can be found.
Sadly, with the rainy season now in full swing, the high water levels make a detailed search of the shores of the Culebra river too dangerous, and the sightings of bodies floating in the river are treated as just another false alarm.
From May 25 till June 4 a special dutch teams of 12 dogs and 18 handlers joins the search for Kris and Lisanne. These dogs, which are specially trained to find immobilized persons, were originally ready to fly to Panama on April 7 but at that moment the dutch authorities did not yet see the need to use these dogs in the search, an opinion they changed only after a special request by the parents and media.
At 7 a.m., rescue dogs and RHW escorts gathered in Duiven.
It was a huge situation to get permission to get the sniffer dogs into Panama.
We've been working on it for three days, and we've had 983 calls and commitments in the last four days.
The rescue team was able to bring 12 rescue dogs and 18 escorts.
Check in this afternoon for their flight to the South American country.
The dogs begin their search in Boquete, the place where the girls disappeared in early April.
Since then, no trace has been found, so the dogs leave late, but it certainly doesn't have to be too late.
We can always find people, but we have found people who were gone for more than six months.
The fact that these dogs are going there now is very good for the family and you can see that.
It's a real revival, and it's bringing strength and energy.
And everybody thinks, okay, we're going to do it again.
In Panama, the girls were searched with dogs, but they were so-called "ruin dogs".
Dogs that can only report living people.
Our dogs are searching for both dead and living people.
What do you expect from the search?
I hope so.
Is that a good chance?
I say fifty percent.
If we're in the right area, we should be able to do it.
I hope you find them.
One of the first area's the dogs search is the Pianista trail and all slopes and surrounding area's, however to the dismay of the dutch handlers they are not allowed to go beyond the second stream on the Atlantic slopes, which marks the border between the David and Bocas del Torro region.
According to SINAPROC the lower slopes have already been searched with dogs, and with the rainy season now in full swing the area closer to the main river is too dangerous, quite apart from the fact that the dogs will not be able to cross via one of the cable bridges.
The dog handlers than ask whether transport by helicopter can be arranged, stating they are willing to camp out in the wild during the night if necessary, so they can search at least some of the lower slopes closer to the river, but sadly this request is denied, possibly because it would require permission from the Bocas del Torro district to deploy the search dogs in that area.
Given that the earlier report of bodies being seen on the shores of the Culebra river was the main reason for these dogs to be send to Panama, the refusal of the Panamanian authorities to deploy the dogs on the Atlantic slopes hits hard on the handlers, and basically dooms the whole mission.
What use is it to send these highly specialized dogs to Panama if you then refuse them access to the area where possible bodies were seen?
Never the less, the handlers try to make the best of it, searching all trails within the area, as well as the houses of Feliciano and Miriam and several other buildings.
An alert which remains unexplained is given a few days later, when they search the Pedra de Lino trail.
On the top of the Pedra de Lino, de dogs detect a find. At this place there is not only a wide view across Boquete, but also a view toward the area where the white bag was found, and beyond, toward the Atlantic slopes.
With the prevailing northerly winds and with the dogs being able to smell bodies over very large distances, it is not completely impossible that this was a genuine alert, but as they are not allowed to search the Atlantic slopes there is no way for the dog handlers to find out.
In the remaining days the dogs are used to search the area of the Baru volcano, as well the Hidden Waterfalls and the Caldera hotsprings, while they are also used for a large number of house searches, all without any results though.
The homes of all Dutch expats in Boquete are searched and during one such search, on June 2, military assistance is requested after a tip when one person is responding very aggressive, causing a Panamanian police officer to become injured. Although the home is found to contain a large number of knives and other weapons, no sign of Kris or Lisanne is found.
On their final day in Panama, the dogs are used to search near an old hydro dam in the Caldera river, where once again the dogs indicate a find, this time halfway up a very steep slope. As the terrain is too steep to traverse, Panamanian experts are used to search the area, and later, after they are back in Holland, the team hears that two bodies have been found, an old man and a child who went missing several months ago.
After the initial hope, the fact that the dogs fail to find any trace of the two girls falls very hard on the parents.
On hindsight, the fact that the dogs were flown in very late, when the rainy season was already under way and crossing the rivers was too dangerous, together with the fact that the dogs were not allowed to operate within the Bocas del Torro district in the north is what doomed the expedition.
Apart from the locals, barely anyone fully understands though how rough and desolate the terrain on the Atlantic slopes, north of the Mirador, truly is.
Even those who occasionally walk the Pianista trail past the Mirador get barely more than a glimpse of what would be waiting for them should they go off the trail. An inexperienced person, moving off trail through terrain such as this will not stand a chance.
Sadly, more than anything else it is the failure of the media to show the real magnitude of the wilderness north of the Mirador which gives rise to the growing number of foul play theories.
Week after week, people are shown cozy scene's from the streets of Boquete, or the reasonable benign terrain just outside the city, where there are lots of farms and cabins, and when the search teams fail to find any trace of the girls the logical conclusion is quickly reached that they must have fallen prey to foul play.
Hampered by bureaucracy and their rigid district borders, SINAPROC concentrates their searches on the Pacific slopes of the David area, secretly well aware that a search on the Atlantic slopes will not stand a chance
Even if they had ten times as many search teams and dogs, a search of the forests on the Atlantic slopes would take many months, and it would be a very dangerous undertaking, certainly during the rainy season..
Once the torrential rains start though, huge quantities of water wash down these slopes, and anything lost in the forest eventually flushes down into the Culebra river. Which is indeed exactly what happens.
The best SINAPROC can do is overfly the rivers and the open paddocks with helicopters, but if Kris and Lisanne went beyond the Mirador and they left the trail for some reason, the chances of finding them in the forests is close to zero.
Sadly, at that time this harsh reality is mostly lost on the parents and the media, as very few people have any real perception of what the terrain beyond the Mirador looks like.
On June 11, 71 days after Kris and Lisanne went missing, Irma the wife of a local farmer from Alto Romero, walks down to the Culebra river to wash herself after working all day on the fields. That day the water is slightly lower than it has been during the past weeks, and in a shallow turn of the river, close to the shore, is a place where the current is less strong.
When she goes down to the water, she spots an object dangling above the water stuck between a large boulder and some driftwood. When she walks over to take a better look, she finds a backpack, which she later shows to her husband.
Inside the backpack, they find 2 mobile phones, a digital camera, 88 dollars and 30 cents, bras and sunglasses, as well as an insurance pass from Lisanne Froon, a little lock with a key, and an empty plastic water bottle.
After ten long weeks there is finally some tangible evidence in the case of the missing girls, and as we will see in the next episode, a subsequent search along the river shore will turn up some more pieces of clothing and remains from both girls, leaving no doubt that both of them have died.
Although the location of the backpack is well outside the search area of the teams from David, this area was searched earlier by locals and by a SINAPROC team from Bocas del Torro, which traveled the whole length of the Pianista trail, in both cases nothing was found.
Due to consistent bad weather, it takes two days before a helicopter is able to deliver Betzaida Piti and other police and SINAPROC officials to Alto Romero, where they inspect the backpack as well as the place where this was found, before taking the backpack back with them for forensic analysis.
Five years later, in the book 'Lost in the Jungle', Pitti will write a dramatic account how she became injured and seriously dehydrated during the long walk from Alto Romero to the river and how she feared she would not make it back alive, however perhaps more surprising is the fact that she instantly halts all further investigations into a possible crime against the two girls.
According to her own report, at the moment the backpack was found, Pitti was planing a major action after a tip that a man in the Renacimiento District was involved in the kidnapping of Kris and Lisanne, but once the backpack was found she concluded that the tip had to be false, and canceled all further searches and investigations.
During an interview, Pitti is said to have remarked that Kris and Lisanne were unhappy in Boquete and perhaps tried to walk back to Bocas del Torro via the Pianista trail, revering to the theory from several of the locals that the two girls had drowned after falling down one of the cable bridges.
Apparently the main purpose of the Panamanian authorities was to find the two girls, and once the backpack and a few of their remains were recovered, this task was accomplished and the case was closed.
This weird and highly controversial decision has haunted this case till this very day, giving rise to an ever growing number of ever wilder theories.
In any normal crime investigation, one would expect that the discovery of remains and major evidence like the backpack would given an extra impulse to the investigation, with a major effort to solve this case and use the new evidence to find the perpetrator, but this never happened.
And as this never happened, it is not surprising at all that hundreds of others decided to start their own research and promote their own theory, trying to solve a case which was never properly closed.
As we will see in the next episode of this series, the parents of Kris and Lisanne weren't happy with this outcome either, and rightfully started their own investigation as well, although in the end they too failed to find a complete answer to all remaining questions.